== Setting up the environment

Singleshot is developed against Rails 2.3.  Make sure to have Rails 2.3
installed:

  gem update --system.
  gem install rails --source http://gems.rubyonrails.org

To get the latest copy use one of the following:

  git clone git://github.com/intalio/singleshot.git

To setup you development environment, specifically installing all the necessary
Gems and setting up the development and test databases, run the setup task:

  rake setup

This will also create a default account using your user name and the password
'secret'

To get started:

  ./script server

Point your browser to http://localhost:3000 and login with your user name and
password.


== Setting up the database

The database is configured in config/databases.yml.  The development and test
database is set to use SQLite3, and the SQLite3 drive is installed when running
rake setup.  For production, you should consider using something else (the
default configuration is MySQL).


== Migrations

Rails migrations are a great way to progress from one database schema version
to another in production.  Each major milestone or release will include a new
set of migrations so production database can be updated by running rake
db:migrate.

Migrations are not used to move from one schema to another during daily
development progress.  The database schema will just change and you'll have to
recreate the entire database.

Those changes are recorded in the form of migration, but to update run:

  rake db:migrate:reset db:test:clone

This task will recreate the entire development and test database.  In addition,
we uses the Annotates Models gem to, well, annotate the Rails models with the
most recent database schema.  So when changing the database schema, follow
with:

  rake db:annotate

Watch the source files for changes, move the schema annotations to their
rightful place.

To recreate the dummy data used for development:

  rake db:populate


== LICENSE

Singleshot  Copyright (C) 2008-2009  Intalio, Inc

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

